= Redis Documentation =

[http://pyha.ru/wiki/index.php?title=Redis:index Russian Translation]

Hello! The followings are pointers to different parts of the Redis Documentation.

= Getting started =

 * New! You can now [http://try.redis-db.com Try Redis directly in your browser!].
 * [README The README] is a good starting point to know more about the project.
 * [QuickStart This short Quick Start] provides a five minutes step-by-step istructions on how to download, compile, run and test the basic workings of a Redis server.
 * [CommandReference The command reference] is a description of all the Redis commands with links to command specific pages. You can also download the [http://go2.wordpress.com/?id=725X1342&site=masonoise.wordpress.com&url=http%3A%2F%2Fmasonoise.files.wordpress.com%2F2010%2F03%2Fredis-cheatsheet-v1.pdf Redis Commands Cheat-Sheet] provided by Mason Jones (btw some command may be missing, the primary source is the wiki).
 * [IntroductionToRedisDataTypes A Fifteen Minutes Introduction to the Redis Data Types] explains how Redis data types work and the basic patterns of working with Redis.
 * [http://simonwillison.net/static/2010/redis-tutorial/ the Simon Willison Redis Tutorial] is a *must read*, very good documentation where you will find a lot of real world ideas and use cases.
 * [http://blog.mjrusso.com/2010/10/17/redis-from-the-ground-up.html Redis from the ground up] is an impressive article to know more about Redis if you are a newcomer.

= Getting started with your preferred language =

 * [http://playnice.ly/blog/2010/10/19/getting-started-redis-python/ Getting started with Redis and Python]

= Full programming examples =

 * [TwitterAlikeExample This is a tutorial about creating a Twitter clone using *only* Redis as database, no relational DB at all is used], it is a good start to understand the key-value database paradigm.

= FAQs and benchmarks =

 * [Benchmarks The benchmark page] is about the speed performances of Redis.
 * [FAQ Our FAQ] contains of course some answers to common questions about Redis. Not very up-to-date.

= HOWTOs about selected features =

 * [ReplicationHowto The Redis Replication HOWTO] is what you need to read in order to understand how Redis master `<->` slave replication works.
 * [AppendOnlyFileHowto The Append Only File HOWTO] explains how the alternative Redis durability mode works. AOF is an alternative to snapshotting on disk from time to time (the default).
 * [VirtualMemoryUserGuide Virtual Memory User Guide]. A simple to understand guide about using and configuring the Redis Virtual Memory.
 * [RedisPipelining Redis Pipelining Guide].
 * Memory optimization: Full of keys, a [http://antirez.com/post/redis-weekly-update-7.html blog post at antirez.com] showing how to use Redis 2.0 and hashes to create a setup where you can store 5 times more data in your Redis instance.
 * [http://antirez.com/post/autocomplete-with-redis.html Implementing auto complete with Redis].

= Hacking =
 * [ProtocolSpecification The Protocol Specification] is all you need in order to implement a Redis client library for a missing language. PHP, Python, Ruby and Erlang are already supported.
 * Look at [RedisInternals Redis Internals] if you are interested in the implementation details of the Redis server.

= Videos =

 * [http://confreaks.net/videos/62-mwrc2009-redis-key-value-nirvana Ezra Zygmuntowicz at the Mountain West Ruby Conference 2009] to know the most important Redis ideas in few minutes.
 * [http://www.ustream.tv/recorded/7855635 Salvatore Sanfilippo and Pieter Noordhuis at the SF Redis Meetup]

= Other documentation =

 * [http://www.rediscookbook.org/ The Redis Cookbook] is a collaborative effort to provide some good recipe.