= How to sponsor my work on Redis =

I'm accepting sponsorships for Redis development, the idea is that a company using Redis and willing to donate some money can receive something back: visibility in the Redis site, and prioritization of features planned in the TODO list that are somewhat more important for this company compared to other features.

In the last year I spent 50% of my time working on Redis. At the same time Redis is released under the very liberal BSD license, this is very important for users as it prevents [http://monty-says.blogspot.com/2009/10/importance-of-license-model-of-mysql-or.html that in the future the project will be killed], but at the same time it's not possible to build a business model selling licenses like it happens for MySQL. The alternative is to run a consultancy company, but this means to use more time to work with customers than working to the Redis code base itself, or sponsorship, that I think is the best option currently to ensure fast development of the project.

So, if you are considering a donation, thank you! This is a set of simple rules I developed in order to make sure I'm fair with everybody willing to help the project:

 * 1. Every company can donate any amount of money, even 10$, in order to support Redis development.
 * 2. Every company donating an amount equal or greater than 1000$ will be featured in the home page for at least 6 months, and anyway for all the time the sponsored feature takes to reach a *stable release* of Redis.
 * 3. Every company donating at least 100$ will anyway be featured in the "Sponsors" page forever, this page is linked near to the logos of the current sponsors in the front page (the logos about point 2 of this list).
 * 4. A sponsoring company can donate for sponsorship of a feature already in the TODO list. If a feature not planned is needed we should first get in touch, discuss if this is a good idea, put it in the TODO list, and then the sponsorship can start, but I've to be genuinely convinced this feature will be good and of general interest ;)
 * 5. In rare case of a vertical, self-contained feature, I could develop it as a patch for the current stable Redis distribution for a donation proportional to the work needed to develop the feature, but in order to have the patch for the next release of Redis there will be to donate again for the porting work and so forth. This is much more a consultancy indeed, but makes sense if associated to a sponsorship of features already in the TODO list.
 * 6. Features for which I receive a good sponsorship (proportionally to the work required to implement the sponsored feature) are prioritized and will get developed faster than other features, possibly changing the development roadmap.
 * 7. To sponsor a specific feature is not a must, a company can just donate to the project as a whole.

If you want to get in touch with me about this issues please drop me an email to my gmail account (username is antirez) or direct-message me @antirez on Twitter. Thanks in advance for the help!