#sidebar SortedSetCommandsSidebar

= ZRANGE _key_ _start_ _end_ `[`WITHSCORES`]`(Redis >= 1.1) =
= ZREVRANGE _key_ _start_ _end_ `[`WITHSCORES`]` (Redis >= 1.1) =
_Time complexity: O(log(N))+O(M) (with N being the number of elements in the sorted set and M the number of elements requested)_

 Return the specified elements of the sorted set at the specified
 key. The elements are considered sorted from the lowerest to the highest
 score when using ZRANGE, and in the reverse order when using ZREVRANGE.
 Start and end are zero-based indexes. 0 is the first element
 of the sorted set (the one with the lowerest score when using ZRANGE), 1
 the next element by score and so on.

 _start_ and _end_ can also be negative numbers indicating offsets
 from the end of the sorted set. For example -1 is the last element of
 the sorted set, -2 the penultimate element and so on.

 Indexes out of range will not produce an error: if start is over
 the end of the sorted set, or start `>` end, an empty list is returned.
 If end is over the end of the sorted set Redis will threat it just like
 the last element of the sorted set.

 It's possible to pass the WITHSCORES option to the command in order to return not
 only the values but also the scores of the elements. Redis will return the data
 as a single list composed of value1,score1,value2,score2,...,valueN,scoreN but client
 libraries are free to return a more appropriate data type (what we think is that
 the best return type for this command is a Array of two-elements Array / Tuple in
 order to preserve sorting).

== Return value ==

[ReplyTypes Multi bulk reply], specifically a list of elements in the specified range.